---
title: "Uncertainty Quantification in Networks with Applications to Brain Connectomics"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-06-01
excerpt: 'My PhD thesis: From social networks to neurosciences, researchers across all disciplines are now faced with the
challenge of adapting statistical methods to vast, high-dimensional arrays of data: how can we
extract patterns and make sense of such large arrays of numbers? In this setting, graphs have become
ubiquitous by offering a versatile modeling framework in which data points are represented as nodes,
while edges capture various aspects of the underlying organization of the data. These edges typically
denote some flexible notion of proximity, ranging from affinities between users and products in
recommendation networks, to causal links in directed acyclic graphs or neuronal coactivation patterns
in brain datasets. Whereas most of the current literature has focused on using graphs for learning
nodes’ properties at an atomic level (community detection, link prediction , etc.), in a
variety of applications, the object of interest is the graph itself. In brain connectomics for instance
— one of the areas of application at the center of this thesis —, the focus is on understanding the
functional and anatomical “wiring” of the brain and its association with cognitive processes and
psychiatric diseases. This process requires the extension of traditional statistical notions (mean,
variance, etc.) to the graph setting, which currently appear as the missing, albeit crucial building
blocks for principled inference on complex systems.
This PhD thesis focuses on providing some methodological tools for extending statistical inference
and uncertainty quantification to graph-structured data — whether these graphs are observed or
latent. In particular, we motivate this problem by its application to the analysis of fMRI data. '
date: 2020-06-01
venue: 'PhD diss., Stanford University'
paperurl: 'https://www.proquest.com/docview/2430981667?pq-origsite=gscholar&fromopenview=true'
image: 'stanford.png'
---

From social networks to neurosciences, researchers across all disciplines are now faced with the
challenge of adapting statistical methods to vast, high-dimensional arrays of data: how can we
extract patterns and make sense of such large arrays of numbers? In this setting, graphs have become
ubiquitous by offering a versatile modeling framework in which data points are represented as nodes,
while edges capture various aspects of the underlying organization of the data. These edges typically
denote some flexible notion of proximity, ranging from affinities between users and products in
recommendation networks, to causal links in directed acyclic graphs or neuronal coactivation patterns
in brain datasets. Whereas most of the current literature has focused on using graphs for learning
nodes’ properties at an atomic level (community detection, link prediction, etc.), in a
variety of applications, the object of interest is the graph itself. In brain connectomics for instance
— one of the areas of application at the center of this thesis —, the focus is on understanding the
functional and anatomical “wiring” of the brain and its association with cognitive processes and
psychiatric diseases. This process requires the extension of traditional statistical notions (mean,
variance, etc.) to the graph setting, which currently appear as the missing, albeit crucial building
blocks for principled inference on complex systems.

This PhD thesis focuses on providing some methodological tools for extending statistical inference
and uncertainty quantification to graph-structured data — whether these graphs are observed or
latent. In particular, we motivate this problem by its application to the analysis of fMRI data.
Chapter 1 describes some of the properties of this extremely rich data source, as well as the many
interesting challenges (low signal-to-noise ratio, scalability, multi-resolution behavior, non-stationarity,
etc.) posed by its analysis and its representation as a graph. Building upon this overview of the
multiple facets of the challenges which arise when working with real-life graph-structured data, we
organize this thesis around the three following themes:

1. Inference and variability quantification on observed graphs. Starting with the setting where the graphs are observed and aligned, the first question that we try to tackle consists in
quantifying their similarity. We divide this analysis task along two axes of variation:\\
__(a) Horizontal:__ comparing multiple graphs. The first main block of our work (Chapter 2) concentrates around the definition of an appropriate distance for contrasting
and comparing aligned networks.\\
__(b) Vertical:__  comparing multiscale representations of graphs. In some instances,
the comparison of coarsened representations of graphs can be more informative than the
comparison of the original ones. We thus turn in Chapter 3 to the extraction of robust
multiscale representations of graphs, which we address here by an adaptation of convex
clustering.

2. Inference for latent graphs: The second main part of our work tackles the case where
the graphs are unobserved, and need to be simultaneously inferred and contrasted. In particular,
Chapter 4 is centered around the extraction of reliable brain connectome networks through the
lens of Bayesian Independent Component Analysis — an approach which allows the flexible
integration of multiple sources of information while providing Bayesian uncertainty estimates.
3. Inference with graphs: Finally, Chapter 5 opens our discussion to the analysis of data
and signals on graphs –rather than the graphs themselves. Indeed, in a number of settings,
the underlying organization of a complex system as a graph is crucial in understanding its
behavior. In epidemiological studies for instance, social networks have been shown to influence
the outcome of an epidemic, its propagation speed, or the variability in the transmission rate.
In this context, it becomes essential to try to impute and integrate characteristics of the network
structure in the analysis. We focus here on accounting for the potential heterogeneity of the
contact network on predictive scenarios for epidemics.
In particular, rather than giving a holistic approach, we strive to tackle and motivate each of these
aspects through the lens of their application on a real, concrete dataset. While most of our motivation
is provided by fMRI analysis, we emphasize that the use of graphs transcends the neuroscience
realm and can be extended to many biomedical applications — which we exemplify in Chapter 2
by considering microbial networks, and in Chapter 5,  by highlighting the usefulness of graphs as
modeling tool in the study of contagion and infectious diseases.\\
<br />

[Download the thesis here](https://www.proquest.com/docview/2430981667?pq-origsite=gscholar&fromopenview=true).



Recommended citation: __Donnat, Claire.__ "Uncertainty Quantification in Networks with Applications to Brain Connectomics.."  <i> PhD diss., Stanford University, 2020</i>.
